# go randgen

[中文文档](./README-ZH.MD)

go version of mysql rangen for db  fuzz test

## Install with `go get` Command

```bash
go get -u  github.com/pingcap/go-randgen/cmd/go-randgen
```

try it:

```bash
go-randgen -h
```

## How to Compile It

 - install `go-bindata` command
 
```bash
go get -u github.com/jteeuwen/go-bindata/...
```

 - compile `go-randgen`

```bash
make all
```

## Features

 1. It has a built-in zz file, you can generate sqls just with a yy file
 2. Be able to generate sql without connection to db, so it is very fast if you just want sqls
 3. yy syntax is mysql randgen compatible, as long as it doesn't contain embedded perl code
 4. go-randgen supports embedded lua code blocks, just as mysql randgen supports perl code blocks
 5. Implemented with pure Golang, it's design is very flexible, easy to hack
 6. All exported functions are stateless other than cmd package, if needed, you can call them as a library
 
## Quick Start

### gentest

generate sqls to test window functions:

```bash
# -Y the path of yy file to use
# -Q sql num to generate by yy
# -B break ddls and generated sqls into two files
# if user doesn't specfied a zz file path, it will use built-in zz
./go-randgen gentest -Y examples/windows.yy -Q 10 -B
```

After execution, you will see a `output.data.sql`, which includes
ddl (define table structrue) and dml (init data in tables), and 
a `output.rand.sql`, which includes sqls generated by specified
 yy file.
 
If you don't want to use [built-in zz](resource/resource/default.zz.lua),
you can write a zz by hand, and use `-Z` to specify path, 
the detail of zz syntax to see following *Grammar Guide*.

If you just want to generate some sqls by yy, without generating ddl,
you can use `--skip-zz` to skip ddl generation,
but yy file can not include key word 
related with table name or field name in this condition.

the detail of yy syntax to see following *Grammar Guide*.

### gendata

generate table structrue and data in user specified dsns 
according to user specified or built-in zz file.

```bash
# generate table structure and data specified by zz in specified dsn
# dsns are split by comma
./go-randgen gendata --dsns "root:@tcp(127.0.0.1:3306)/randgen,root:@tcp(127.0.0.1:4000)/randgen"
```

### gensql

parse yy to generate sqls by user specified dsn:

```bash
./go-randgen gensql -Y examples/functions.yy \  
             --dsn "root:@tcp(127.0.0.1:3306)/randgen" \ 
             -Q 100
```


Note that `gensql` assumes structures of tables in the dsn
are the same (Because data genrated by randgen has this trait).

### exec

User sepecifies two dsns, then exec command will execute 
generated sqls in two dsn and dump sqls with inconsistent
execution result.

Example:

```bash
./go-randgen exec -Y examples/functions.yy \
             --dsn1 "root:@tcp(127.0.0.1:4000)/randgen" \
             --dsn2 "root:@tcp(127.0.0.1:3306)/randgen" \  
             -Q 100
```

In above command, go randgen will generate data in two dsns
 first, then execute 100 sqls generated according to functions.yy,
 if execution result of a sql is inconsistent, it will dump
 related info into `dump` directory.
 (you can change this directory by `--dump`)
 
Note that go randgen compare sql result without order in default.
For example, go-randgen think that the following result is consistent:

```
Result1:

+------+------+
| p    | s    |
+------+------+
|    1 | aaa  |
|    2 | bbb  |
+------+------+

Result2:

+------+------+
| p    | s    |
+------+------+
|    2 | bbb  |
|    1 | aaa  |
+------+------+
```

If you want to compare in order byte by byte, you 
should add `--order`.

`exec` can also skip data generation by set `--skip-zz`,
it will generate sqls just like `gensql` command.

### Call It as a Library

Except packages under `cmd` directory, all exported 
functions is stateless, you can call them again and again
safely.

The implementation under `cmd` directory is the best examples
to use it as a library. 

## Grammar Guide

### zz Grammar

#### Quick Start

zz file is a lua script file, it will define the following three 
things:

 1. tables to generate
 2. fields in tables
 3. data in fields
 
Use [built-in zz](resource/resource/default.zz.lua) as an example:

```lua
-- table related defination
tables = {
    -- record number
    rows = {10, 20, 30, 90},
    -- table character set
    charsets = {'utf8', 'latin1', 'binary'},
    -- table partition number, 'undef' represents no partition
    partitions = {4, 6, 'undef'},
}

-- field related defination
fields = {
    -- field data types
    types = {'bigint', 'float', 'double', 'decimal(40, 20)',
        'char(20)', 'varchar(20)'},
    -- generate signed and unsigned field with above type 
    sign = {'signed', 'unsigned'}
}

-- data init related defination
data = {
    -- optional value of number type
    numbers = {'null', 'tinyint', 'smallint',
        '12.991', '1.009', '-9.183',
        'decimal',
    },
    -- optional value of char type
    strings = {'null', 'letter', 'english'},
}
```

As you can see, there must be three lua Table variables in zz file,
which is **tables**, **fields** and **data**.

**tables** defines attributes on table, like `rows`, `charsets`
and `partitions` in above example, these attributes' 
cartesian product will be evaluated,  
every tuple in which will generate a table. 
 **tables** definition in above example will generate 
 4(rows)*3(charsets)*3(partitions)=36 tables in total.
 
**fields** defines what fields in tables, 
these infos' cartesian product
 also will be evaluated, 
 every tuple in which will generate a field,
 but the fields generated by above example is 
 less than 6(types)*2(sign)=12, because 
 `sign` attribute can only apply on numberic type,
 go-randgen will automatically ignore it for non-numberic
 types, so example definition will only genrate 
 4(number)*2(sign)+2(char)=10 fields. Note that tables
  generated by randgen all have the same fields.
  
**data** defines data in tables, key represents field types
(see following for detail), value is an array, which are 
optional values of this type. For each genrated record,
it will random choose a value for fields of
 corresponding type. Optional values include 
 "literal" and "generator".Take the definition of `numbers`
  above as an example, `null`,`12.991`, etc. are literals,
  they will be take directly as a value, but when `tinyint`
  (it is a generator) is taken, it will generate a random
  value in `-128~127` 
  (to know more generators, see following for detail).  
  
  
#### tables

| keys     | mean    |  options  | default |
| -------- | -----   | ---- | ----|
| rows     | record number in table  |  any positive number    |[0, 1, 2, 10, 100] |
| charsets   | table's character set    |  'utf8','utf8mb4','ascii','latin1','binary', 'undef' means not set charset explicitly|['undef'] |
| partitions | partition number of table | any positive number or 'undef', 'undef' means no partition   |['undef'] |


Related source code is `tablesVars` variable in
[gendata/tables.go](gendata/tables.go) 

#### fields

| keys   | mean    |  options  | default |
| ------ | -----   | ---- | ----|
| types  | field type |任意合法的mysql类型|['int', 'varchar', 'date', 'time', 'datetime'] |
| keys   | index or not  |'key' means add index to the field, 'undef' means not|['undef', 'key']|
| sign   | unsigned or not |'signed', 'unsigned'|['signed']|

Related source code is `fieldVars` variable in
[gendata/fields.go](gendata/fields.go).

#### data

data definition in go-randgen is enhanced compared with mysql
randgen. mysql randgen only support five summary types, which
 is `numbers`, `blobs`, `temporals`, `enum` and `strings`.
 go-randgen not only support the five summary types, but also
 support fine-grained definition.
 
For example:

```lua
data = {
    numbers = {'null', 'tinyint', 'smallint',
        '12.991', '1.009', '-9.183',
        'decimal',
    },
    bigint = {100, 10, 3},
}
```

For above data definition, it will take 
randomly from `100`, `10` 
and `3` when go-randgen generate bigint field, 
instead from `numbers` definition, which is more rough.

The map from concrete data types to summary types is 
 `summaryType` variable in [gendata/data.go](gendata/data.go).
 
Among above `numbers` definition, 'tinyint', 'smallint', 'decimal'
 are go-randgen built-in generators.
 
To know all generators in go-randgen, you can see
`init` function in
[gendata/generators/register.go](gendata/generators/register.go)

### yy Grammar

#### Quick Start

A simple example:

```yacc

# one line comment
/*
multiline comment
*/

query:
    select
    | select1

select:
    SELECT fields FROM _table
    
fields:
    _field
    | _field_int
```

The generated result of this yy maybe:

```sql
select1
SELECT "a random field" FROM "a random table in this db"
SELECT "a random int field" FROM "a random table in this db"
select1
```

#### Comment

 - one line comment: `#`
 - multiline comment: `/**/`
 
 
#### Classifications of Identifier

 - Non-Terminal: be composed of lowercase, number of underline, but can not begin with number
 - Terminal: be composed of uppercase, special character or number, but can not begin with underline
 - Keyword: begin with underline
 
> For Non-Terminal in the right of production, if the corresponding production can not be found, the Non-Terminal degrade to Terminal


#### Keyword

Keyword begin with underline.

The keywords to get table names and field names:

 - `_table`: randomly get a table name from generated tables
 - `_field`: randomly get a field name from generated fields
 - `_field_int`: randomly get a field from generated int fields
 - `_field_char`: randomly get a field from generated char and varchar fields
 
Some sugars to randomly generate data(it will generate double quotes automatically in character related data):

 - `_digit`: random number in 0-9
 - `_letter`: random char from 'a' to 'z'
 - `_english`: random English word
 - `_int`: radom int value
 - `_date`: generate randomly `yyyy-MM-dd` formatted date
 - `_year`: random year
 - `_time`: random `hh:mm:ss` formatted time
 - `_datetime`: random `yyyy-MM-dd hh:mm:ss` formatted time
 
I only write a part of keywords. If you want to know all keywords,
You can see the `NewKeyfun` function in [gendata/gendata.go](gendata/gendata.go)

#### Embedded Lua Code Block

You can write lua code in "{}", call `print` function to splice content
 to sql
 
```
query:{a = 1}
    CREATE TABLE 
    {print(string.format("t%d", a))} (a INT)
```

Above example will always generate sql `CREATE TABLE t1 (a INT)`.

You can call any funcation in lua standard library, for example:

```
# random number from 10-20
query:
    {print(math.random(10,20))}
```

Normal code block will be executed every time the corresponding
 branch is selected. 
 
go-randgen support insert code in the head of yy file, this code
 will only be executed once, called **head code block**, the main
  application of head code block is the declaration of variables
  or functions:
  
```
# head code block
{
i = 1
a = 100
function add(num1, num2)
    return num1 + num2    
end
}

query:
   select

select:
   SELECT * FROM _table WHERE where_clause
   
where_clause:
   _field_int > {print(i)}
   | _field_char > {print(a)}
   | _field_int + _field_int > {print(add(i, a))}
   
```

You may be afraid that the brace may 
be conflict with lua Table definition.In fact, you are worried
for no thing, you are free to use lua Table in code block:

```
{
f={a=1, b=3}
arr={0,2,3,4}
}

query:
  {print(arr[f.a])} | {print(arr[f.b])}
```

Above example will only genrate "0" or "3"
(Note that index of lua array begin from 1).

#### Frequent Pattern

 - recursive subquery
 
```
query:
    select

select:
    SELECT * FROM
    (select)
    WHERE _field_int > 10
    | SELECT * FROM _table WHERE _field_char = _english
```

 - empty rule
 
```
 order:
     ASC
     |DESC
     |    # order can product empty
     
 #...
```

 - generate a sequence of sqls

For exampe, we want to test Prepared statement
 
```
query:
	SET @stmt = {print('"')} select {print('"')};
	PREPARE stmt FROM @stmt_create ; 
	EXECUTE stmt ;
	
select:
    SELECT * FROM _table
```

If you generate 3 sqls with above yy(namely set `-Q` with 3),
it will generate sqls as follow:

```sql
SET @stmt = " SELECT * FROM _table ";
PREPARE stmt FROM @stmt_create; 
EXECUTE stmt;
```

If you generate 6 sqls, it will generate above sqls twice.

If you generate 2 sqls, result is as follow:

```sql
SET @stmt = " SELECT * FROM _table ";
PREPARE stmt FROM @stmt_create; 
```

From above examples, we can see the mean of `;`. The symbol extends
 from mysql randgen, represents generation of a sequence of sqls.
 
 - create unique table when test create statements
 
Program 1: insert lua script, apply head code block

```
# declare i to 1
{
i = 1
}

query: 
    create
    
create:
    CREATE TABLE 
    {print(string.format("table%d", i)); i = i+1}
    (a int)
```

Program 2: create table first, then drop it in next sql

```
query:
    create
    
create:
    CREATE TABLE t (a int); DROP TABLE t
```

Result:

```
CREATE TABLE t (a int);
DROP TABLE t;
CREATE TABLE t (a int);
DROP TABLE t;
...
```

## How to Hack

Compared to mysql randgen, 
go-randgen is very easy to hack. If you want some feature 
it doesn't have yet, you can add it conveniently.

### Hack zz data

If you think all built-in generators do not meet your demand,
you can register new generator 
in `init` function in  
[gendata/generators/register.go](gendata/generators/register.go)

Assume that you add a `aaa` generator, you will not only can use 
`"aaa"` in zz data field, but alse can use `_aaa` key word in yy.

### Hack yy Keyword

You can add your keyword in 
`NewKeyfun` function in [gendata/gendata.go](gendata/gendata.go)

## Differences with mysql randgen

 - do not need to add `;` at the end of bnf expression, which is the habit of mysql randgen. go-randgen do not depend on `;` to  recognize different bnf expression. Of course, there is no problem if you add `;` at the end of bnf expression, because we are compatible with mysql randgen
 - go-randgen init zz data with `insert` statement, other than `insert ignore`. So if it meets `unsigned` field, it will try 10 times at most to generate positive value, if it fails in 10 times, 1 will be assigned to this field
 - data definition in zz can be more precise, other than the only four types in mysql randgen
 - support generate sqls without connection to db, which takes advantage of schema cache in ddls generation, it is very fast.